Through his prophet Isaiah,
Jehovah made a wonderful promise,
one that’s being fulfilled today.
We can read about it at Isaiah 60:17:
“Instead of the copper I will bring in gold,
“and instead of the iron
I will bring in silver,
“instead of the wood, copper,
“and instead of the stones, iron;
“and I will appoint peace as your overseers
and righteousness as your task assigners.”
Well, now, this reference to “overseers”
and “task assigners”
—that sounds like organization, doesn’t it?
So, what is Jehovah telling us?
He’s saying that we can expect
to see organizational arrangements
getting better and better.
Well, if you’ve been associated
with the truth for a while,
I’m sure you’ll agree that Isaiah’s prophecy
is being fulfilled today.
So for this broadcast,
I thought we’d review
some of the improvements
we’ve seen just since World War II.
That’s the period
most of us are familiar with.
Now, some of you will be hearing
about these things for the first time.
Others will have lived through it all,
and for them it’ll bring back fond memories.
So let’s go back.
It’ll be fun!
I call this part
“Do You Remember When . . . ?”
Before World War II
and for a number of years after that,
many congregations
didn’t have a Kingdom Hall of their own.
They were actually encouraged
to meet in private homes
or in rented facilities.
The thinking was that if you
were in a rented facility or a private home,
you had more flexibility.
You could move the meeting place
from one place to the other very easily.
But there were problems; there were drawbacks.
Sometimes the space
would be shared with other organizations.
So you couldn’t leave your
literature, magazines,
speaker’s stand, and maybe even a sound system
in the hall at the end of the meeting.
When the meeting was over,
you’d have to pack it all up
and take it away.
But that’s not all.
Sometimes you had to arrive very early
and clean the place up
after a particularly rowdy group
of people had used it.
And if there were cigar smokers
in that group, you were in trouble.
It was very difficult to air the place out
in time for the meeting.
Now, remember, in those days,
people could smoke in a private hall,
and you could smoke in an airplane
—they could smoke almost anywhere.
So this was a real problem for us.
There were other problems.
Before we had a Kingdom Hall in my hometown,
the congregation met in a rented facility.
Now, in October,
the place was decorated for Halloween,
and in December, there was
a great big Christmas tree on the platform.
We couldn’t move it!
Now, this was in Canada,
and portraits
of the King and Queen of England
as well as the British flag
were permanent fixtures in the hall.
You couldn’t remove
any of it for the meeting.
Yet, to their credit,
many interested persons
attended our meetings.
And to them, it wasn’t
the meeting place that was important;
it was what
they were learning there that counted.
Speaking of our meeting places,
at first, congregations were on their own
when it came to building them.
Now, at times, the most a congregation
could afford was to purchase the land,
and sometimes that land would sit there
for years because it would
take years to get the money together
to build the hall.
And then once they had the money together,
were there enough brothers who could take
the lead in the construction?
Sometimes on a weekend, you’d see
just one or two brothers working away
at the site of the new hall.
You had to love them for their perseverance.
Nowadays,
our Kingdom Hall construction
is supervised by the LDCs,
with lots of qualified volunteers,
and practical Kingdom Halls
can be constructed in a short period of time.
What about the meetings?
For years, the Theocratic Ministry School,
Service Meeting,
Congregation Book Study,
and Watchtower  Study
were all about an hour in length.
So were the public talks
—when we had them.
Now, at first, a public talk
wasn’t scheduled every week.
There’d be a series of four or eight talks,
if you could schedule that many speakers.
And then, for a while,
the congregation wouldn’t have a public talk.
Why was that?
Remember,
the Theocratic Ministry School
didn’t get under way until 1943,
and it took time for the brothers to develop
the skills to deliver an hour talk.
But in time, they were delivering
excellent public talks!
And do you remember
when we had individual handbills
for each public talk
with the name of the speaker printed on them?
Until 1959,
only brothers were enrolled in the school.
For some years, during the first few minutes
of the school there was a roll call,
and the names of all the brothers
enrolled in the school were read out.
Now, when your name was read out,
you were to answer, “Present.”
A few rebels would say, “Here.”
But you were supposed to say, “Present.”
Now, initially,
according to the instructions,
if anyone was deliberately
and habitually absent over a period of time,
he was dropped from the school.
Later, that was discontinued.
Now, the roll-call arrangement
got me into a bit of trouble.
You see, in our congregation
when the roll was being called each week,
I noticed that there
were a few young brothers
who were just a little bit older than I was
who would answer, “Present.”
So one night after the school,
I asked the school servant
if I could have my name read out
at the next meeting.
He warmly commended me.
And sure enough,
I got my name read out the following week.
Everyone congratulated me after the meeting.
I couldn’t understand why.
I only said, “Present.”
The problem was that I didn’t know
that when you got your name read out,
you were agreeing to give a talk.
I thought I was just signing up
to have my name read out.
Well, a couple of months later,
on April 8, 1953,
I delivered my first
eight-minute talk on the theme
“Proclaiming the World’s Doom.”
Now, why an eight-minute talk?
Well, we didn’t have Bible readings yet.
So when you were on the school,
you were giving an eight-minute talk.
Well, today, we make sure
everyone understands what’s involved
in being a student in the midweek meeting.
In 1950,
we received the New World Translation
of the Christian Greek Scriptures  in English,
and we were encouraged
to bring it to the meetings.
So for the Hebrew Scriptures,
you would have the American Standard Version
or the King James Version
—mostly the American Standard Version
because it had Jehovah’s name.
So you’d have two Bibles
to bring to the meeting.
There’s the one for the Hebrew Scriptures
and then the New World Translation
for the Greek Scriptures—two Bibles.
It wasn’t too bad.
But later, the New World Translation
of the Hebrew Scriptures
was released in installments.
So you’d get a volume every year or two.
And as we received each new volume,
we were encouraged
to bring it to the meeting.
Now, in time, those volumes
started to pile up
so that by 1960,
you might have volumes 1 through 5
of the Hebrew Scriptures,
also the Greek Scriptures,
and your regular study aids!
And we had thick study aids in those days.
We had big briefcases
and strong backs in those days.
We were really happy to get
the complete New World Translation
in just one volume in 1961.
Now, let’s say a word about music.
That’s something that’s near
and dear to my heart.
For many years,
it was left up to the local servants
to decide which songs the congregation
would sing at the meetings.
So the chairman of a particular meeting
would select the songs,
but his choice wasn’t always final.
Many Kingdom Halls had a piano
or some other instrument
to accompany the singing.
But often the musician couldn’t play
all of the songs in the book,
so we’d have to sing the songs he could play.
We got to know those few songs really well!
But those humble musicians
did their best to accompany our singing.
Now, as a result of all this,
the words to those songs
we sang nearly 70 years ago
still come readily to mind.
Do you remember the written review?
Maybe you don’t.
Congregations periodically
had a written review of material
that had been covered
in the Theocratic Ministry School
over the previous weeks.
Now, we had a half hour to answer
about 25 questions.
But then, when the half hour was up,
we would write our name on the paper,
hand it in to the school servant,
and he would take
all the papers home to grade them.
Now, if there were 25 questions,
you’d get 4 points apiece
for each correct answer—100 points total.
And then a week later,
he’d return the papers to us at the meeting.
Now, in the early years of the arrangement
(I remember well),
he’d announce the highest
and lowest grade to the congregation.
Now, thankfully, he didn’t mention the names
of the one who got
the highest and lowest score.
Well, later, that arrangement to announce
the highest and lowest grade
was discontinued.
Do you remember when circuit assemblies
began on Friday evening
and continued through Sunday afternoon?
A full program
was presented Saturday afternoon and evening.
There was never a dull moment
on Saturday night.
There were lively demonstrations
that kept our interest
right up to the end of the program.
Sometimes the sets were very elaborate.
For example,
suppose a publisher was demonstrating
a presentation from door to door.
Now, today
we’d just imagine there was a door.
But back then at the circuit assembly,
there might be a frame
with a painted door on the stage,
and maybe even a doorbell
for the publisher to ring.
Now, if the householder
was supposed to be interested,
you knew it
because the house number was 777.
And if the householder
was going to be opposed,
you knew that as well
because the house number would be 666.
Now, on one program that I remember,
the publisher knocks on the door
and a brother dressed as a priest answers.
He puts up a real argument about the Trinity.
Talk about visual aids
—but you never forgot what you saw and heard!
And do you remember when
each congregation had a congregation servant
and up to seven other servants:
the assistant congregation servant,
the Bible study servant,
the accounts servant,
the Watchtower  study servant,
the magazine-territory servant,
the literature servant,
and the Theocratic Ministry School servant?
Now, at that time,
apart from book study conductors,
you couldn’t have more than
eight servants in the congregation.
So unless someone moved,
a young man had no chance
of becoming a servant.
So how could a young man
reach out for more responsibility?
And how would the prophecy recorded
at Micah 5:5 ever be fulfilled?
There Jehovah promised:
“We will raise up against him
seven shepherds,
yes, eight princes of mankind.”
Well, seven represents completeness.
So eight princes—that would indicate
that there would be
more than enough men in the congregations
to provide theocratic direction.
But how could that be
when there was basically
a limit of eight servants per congregation?
The answer came in 1971.
We were thrilled when we understood
that each congregation has a body of elders,
and there is no set number
of elders or ministerial servants.
As many as are qualified can be appointed.
Now, when I was baptized 66 years ago,
you didn’t have to be approved
for baptism by the congregation.
The only questions asked
of baptism candidates
were the two they answered
at the conclusion of the baptism talk.
That led to a few strange situations.
On a few occasions
—much to the surprise of the servants—
someone would rush up
to the front of the hall at the end
of the baptism talk,
answer the two questions,
and get baptized.
Something more was needed
—assurance that the individual
really knew what he was doing
and especially that he was living
in harmony with Scriptural principles.
So in 1967,
questions were provided
so that the responsible brothers
could be assured that each candidate
was truly qualified for baptism.
Those questions have been refined
over the years.
And today, we go over some 60 questions
with baptism candidates.
The copper has turned to gold.
Do you remember when there were
very few pictures in our publications?
And the few that we had
were usually in black and white
or only two colors.
Today, our spiritual food
is served in attractive publications
in full color.
Now, those of us who’ve served
in foreign-language congregations
will also remember
when a new publication in English
might not be available
in another language for several years.
Study articles trailed by several months.
Now, that’s before it became possible
for the branches
to do simultaneous printing.
So here’s how it worked.
Material in English
would be mailed to the branches
by regular mail for translation.
If the translators had a question
about the meaning of a sentence in English,
they would use regular mail
to send their question to headquarters.
In time, headquarters would answer back
by regular mail.
This back and forth
—it could take quite a while.
And in some countries, mail service was poor.
Now, today,
thanks to special computer programs
that our brothers have developed
and the ability to communicate electronically
and some other factors, we’re able to release
most language editions simultaneously
with the English.
What an improvement!
Now, speaking of our literature,
do you realize that it’s been some 31 years
since the decision was made
that in the United States
we’d no longer ask
for a contribution for our literature?
Later, the arrangement
was extended worldwide.
That’s been a real blessing for our brothers!
For example,
when we were asking
for contributions for literature,
some brothers in Africa and other places
couldn’t afford to have a Watchtower
for every member of the family.
They were just too poor.
And what about bound books?
I’ll tell you an experience.
In one African country, a missionary noticed
that a young brother quoted
a wide variety of scriptures
in his comments, and he got curious.
One day, he asked the young brother,
“How did you come to know
so many scriptures?”
The brother replied:
“It’s the Reasoning  book.
I read it every chance I get.”
The missionary asked him, “What do you mean
you read it every chance you get?”
Well, he replied:
“I don’t have a Reasoning  book myself.
“I could never afford one.
“But I know a sister who has one,
“and she lets me borrow it from time to time.
I read it every chance I get.”
Well, you can imagine,
the missionary went out
and bought him a Reasoning  book
and a New World Translation
for good measure.
It was a great investment.
The young brother
was later called into Bethel,
and where do you think he was assigned?
To the literature department.
The brothers knew
that he appreciated the literature so much
that he’d make sure the congregations
had the literature they needed.
Well, looking back,
we can see that the arrangements
back then served a purpose.
They were like fine copper.
We do not look down on them.
Rather, we take the view expressed
at Zechariah 4:10:
“Who has despised the day
of small beginnings?”
Now, as those taking the lead
saw a better way of doing things,
they didn’t hesitate to make adjustments.
That’s very faith-strengthening.
And the best is yet to come!
As I mentioned in the beginning,
this may be the first time that some of you
have heard about these things.
Why not ask someone
who has been in the truth for many years
what it was like
when he was new in the truth?
That could lead
to a very stimulating discussion!